Welcome back to Movie Recaps. Today
I will show you a Russian horror and
sci-fi film from 2020, called Sputnik.
Spoilers ahead! Watch out and take care.
It's 1983 and "Orbita-4" is in orbit around Earth,
carrying two cosmonauts. One of them is singing
and is kidding with the other - Kostya that he'll
report him to mission control for not doing the
same. They chit chat about what they'll do when
they get home, while mission control checks up
on them. Kostya opens the latch hocks and they
undock. The other sings again as they are getting
into the landing position, but something hits the
spaceship. They gain control back of the ship, but
the singing cosmonaut sees something in the window
moving outside of the ship and toward the hatch.
Later, a parachute is seen in the sky over Soviet
Kazakhstan. A man on a horse approaches the fallen
spaceship. He lights a flashlight and finds one
of the cosmonauts dead on the side of the ship.
The other one is crawling out of the
ship, barely finding his footing,
as the man approaches him. When
the cosmonaut raises his head,
blood is coming out of his mouth
and his eyes are completely black.
A woman is seen entering a conference room in
the Research Institute for Brain AMS in Moscow.
The room is being prepared for a hearing. The
board members come in and the hearing begins.
Tatyana is being investigated about an
injury she possibly inflicted on a patient.
Her colleagues from the board don't doubt her
methods, but still think that a certain level of
negligence should be considered. She disagrees,
saying that the she did what needed to be done
on a misdiagnosed patient. A man is observing the
hearing and later approaches Tatyana in the lobby.
He introduces himself as Colonel Semiradov
and asks for her consulting help on a patient,
saying that he also runs a form of research
institute. She is a little apprehensive,
but becomes interested as he tells her
that he's also involved in neuropsychiatry.
Semiradov tells her that he will take her to see
the patient, but if she doesn't want to work the
case, he'll bring her back. On the way there in a
helicopter, they talk about the patient. She asks
for his medical files, but instead he gives her an
oral report. He tells her that the patient is one
of the cosmonauts from Orbita-4 and explains that
certain things were left out of the media. Kostya
appears to be suffering from episodic amnesia, not
remembering the incident that happened in space,
before the ship landed. She asks if she should
sign a non-disclosure agreement, considering that
the cosmonaut, a Soviet national hero, might have
lost his mind. They arrive in Kazakhstan and take
a car to the a Scientific Research institute. Once
there, Semiradov informs her that she can move
freely in 90% of the institute and after she gets
her clearance she could get into the restricted
area as well. They enter an elevator which takes
them to an observational room. Meanwhile, Kostya
is being hypnotized by a psychiatrist. Tatyana
observes the session from the other side of the
glass. The psychiatrist wants to get information
out of the cosmonaut, but he just kids with him.
The doctor gets angry, saying he can't
help him if he doesn't let him help.
The man coughs and the doctor gets unnerved.
Kostya tells him that he can't be hypnotized,
since only the most mentally strong can be sent to
space. Doctor Rigel walks into the other side of
the room, greeted by Semiradov who tells Tatyana
that he's the research director of the institute.
The cosmonaut bangs on the window and asks
what has happened to his colleague. Tatyana
asks what Colonel Semiradov needs and he tells
her that he needs her opinion on his condition.
She walks on the other side of the window
and introduces herself. Kostya is happy for
the change from Rigel. She offers him some tea,
which he takes and drinks. Tatyana observes all
of his movements and tells him why she's there,
then asks him about the toy in the corner. He
replies that it's his, something having to do
with cosmonaut traditions. She asks him what
happened during the mission, but he's weary of
doing it again. Since she hasn't read the files,
he still tells her that the mission went
without a glitch until the landing procedure,
after which he can't remember anything, part
from waking up in the Institute. He realizes
that she can't help him get out of there, so when
she says that she can at least help him, Kostya
gives her the name and number of his mother asking
Tatyana to inform her that he's alive and well.
She takes the tea and before she leaves, says
that it was a pleasure to meet him. When she
hands the teacup to Rigel it burns his hands and
she explains to the Colonel that Kostya has PTSD
and that his sensory receptors or peripheral
nervous system might be damaged. After giving
her evaluation, she asks to leave. Semiradov
tells her that she can leave in the morning.
The soldier taking her to her room tells her
that the Colonel would need to authorize her
departure tomorrow. As they walk, they see a few
people working under supervision. To her question
about them, the soldier replies that they are
prisoners, brought in to do hard labor. He takes
her to her room and says she's the only one in the
building. Tatyana gets into her room and unpacks,
then wants to make an outside call, only to be
told that no one can make those from the base,
except Semiradov. That night, she's taking a bath
and a giant scar is seen on her back. She takes
some pills for the pain and goes to bed, but since
she can't sleep she goes out for a run. Suddenly,
she runs into one of the prisoners. Once back
in her room, there's a knock on the door. It's
Semiradov. He takes her back to the observation
room and asks her when was the last time she ate.
When she replies, he checks his watch and gives
the order to start. A glass window comes down in
the cosmonauts chambers and more soldiers come in,
securing the door. Tatyana and the others watch
the security cameras as something starts happening
to Kostya's body. Suddenly, he falls from the bed
and something is coming out of his mouth. The
blob transforms into an alien creature. Tatyana
is shocked. Semiradov asks her if she wants
to take a closer look. She goes to the glass
window and waits for a sight of the creature.
It appears. She observes it and it observes her.
Tatyana reaches her hand out to it, but it jumps
at the window. She goes out of the room shocked
and terrified. Semiradov runs to her and tells her
the creature is non-terrestrial. Tatyana wants to
know if Kostya is aware that it lives inside
of him, but that doesn't seem to be the case.
The Colonel wants her to find a way to separate
the host from the parasite or she could leave and
sign the non-disclosure agreement. She asks why
he chose her for the task and he answers that it
is because she is willing to take risks. In his
mind that would save their national hero. Tatyana
asks for the videotapes of the creature, Kostya's
testimony and all the notes they have. She will
need to have two sessions a day with him, one hour
each. The Colonel is content to have her stay.
Tatyana goes through the documents and finds out
that the cosmonaut was placed in a rehabilitation
center first, but the creature emerged the first
night and killed a medical technician. Then they
brought him to the facility and started trying to
separate the man from the creature, though nothing
has worked thus far. Without the creature inside
of him, the cosmonaut's vital signs drop, but with
the creature inside, he has amazing capabilities
of regeneration. When the creature is incubating,
it takes up very little space inside of Kostya's
body. And outside of the cosmonaut it can reach
up to a meter and a half. Exiting his body,
it releases a toxin that knocks out Kostya
and once it exits, it can stay out for an hour
and 40 to 50 minutes. It's exiting schedule has
remained consistent every night. Tatyana pegs
the question, is it a parasite or a symbiote?
Kostya is seen exercising in a gym,
under the supervision of a doctor.
He tells him not to exert himself too much.
The cosmonaut says he feels generally good,
but that he just has a small tickle in his throat.
Later, Tatyana is looking through the footage of
the creature and is taking down some numbers.
Rigel comes in and she asks for the whereabouts
of Kostya's son, but he doesn't really answer.
Then, she asks what the creature feeds on and he
tells her that it feeds on the same things
that Kostya eats. She tries to establish a
rapport with the doctor, but he dismisses her
attempts and tells her to talk to the Colonel.
She calls the orphanage where Kostya's son
is staying from Colonel Semiradov's office.
A paralyzed child is seen getting up and going to
get something, but a nurse catches it in the act
and stops it, scolding it. The next day, Tatyana
comes into Kostya's room for their session. She
tells him that the people who brought her to the
Institute think that he has lost his mind and that
he's killed his co-pilot. Rigel and the Colonel
are listening from the other side and the doctor
isn't happy about her questions, while the Colonel
is confused. The cosmonaut is confused that they
would think that about him and if that's the only
reason why he's being held behind armored glass.
She asks him who he really is. He's answer
- a hero. Tatyana antagonizes him over the
heroism of spaceflight and quickly
moves on to ask him about his son,
telling him his abandoned him. He's offended
and asks her to leave the session. On the other
side of the window, she tells them to test his
endocrine system, thinking that if they understand
his hormone levels under stress, they'll be
able to figure out what the creature eats.
Next, she asks the Colonel to move him into the
civilian area during the day, so that they can
get a more realistic clinical picture. Semiradov
abides her request and gives Kostya a normal room.
Tatyana comes into his room and apologizes,
explaining why she did what she did in the
session. He tells her that he didn't know about
the boy, that he was informed about his existence
when his mother died, one week before the mission.
Before she leaves, he asks her one more thing - to
tell him why he's really being kept there.
However, Tatyana can't answer that question.
That night, she goes into the observation room to
see the alien creature. She tries tapping on the
window to get it's attention, but then crouches
down and waits for it to appear. When it does,
she lies down and it mimics her behavior. Tatyana
disturbs the cosmonauts toy when she stands up and
she notices the way the creature looks at it, so
she asks to go inside the room. The Colonel allows
it, so she is put in a protective suit. She enters
the room and puts the toy down for the creature.
It immediately goes to it and coils around
it. Tatyana wants to touch the creature,
but she slips and she falls. The creature grabs
her and drags her in, so the general flashes it
with lights and Tatyana is taken away from the
room. The Colonel then goes to face the creature.
That night, Tatyana is in her room and the Colonel
comes inside uninvited. She proceeds to explain
to him what she learned from the incident with
the toy. She thinks that the creature and the
cosmonaut share the same consciousness because of
the way it reacted to the toy that means a lot to
Kostya. Furthermore, she thinks that every night
it spends more time outside of Kostya's body and
eventually it won't need him anymore. Tatyana
asks the Colonel to take them to Moscow, but he
refuses, knowing that won't be possible because
of how much they don't know about the creature.
Later, she goes to talk to Rigel and notices
something wrong with one of the videotapes.
He says it's a glitch, but she hits him with
the question about the difference in the hormone
levels of the cosmonaut between day and night.
She thinks they feed the creature something that
they're not sharing with her. Rigel tells
her to leave while she still can. But she
thinks he wants a Nobel Prize and offers to
help him get it without her own accolades.
Tatyana asks for the missing information to be
given to her without the Colonel's knowledge.
Rigel hides her in his vehicle and sneaks her into
the restricted part of the facility. Meanwhile,
Kostya is being given sedatives, knocked out and
then wheeled back into the observational room.
Rigel parks the car inside the facility
and gives Tatyana night goggles, telling
her the battery lasts for only ten minutes. He
leaves the car and a giant cage can be seen,
with a few soldiers taking out a prisoner
from a truck and putting him inside of it.
They turn the lights out and they all put on night
goggles. The creature has left Kostya's body and
it's been guided to the cage. Tatyana sees it
from the car, as it goes toward the prisoner, then
jumps it and rips his head off. She makes a sound
and one of the soldiers hears her inside the car.
Rigel diverts the soldiers attention and he
doesn't find her. Later, he drives her back
at the dormitory and gives her some water, as
well as some additional information. He found
out that the creature feeds on cortisol, the fear
hormone that's released in the brain. But he tells
her that feeding it humans was the Colonel's idea.
She leaves the car telling him that he's a coward.
The next day, Tatyana asks Kostya to
go for a run with her. As they run,
she tells him about the creature and that they
need help from the government to separate them,
but he runs back. He tells her to find out
if she's being followed and meet him in his
block at 1 AM. That night, they give him his
pills, but when they leave he throws them up.
He crushes up the pills and puts them in his tea.
Then, he leaves his room and chats up the nurse
that's guarding him, asking her to come inside
and watch a movie with him. She falls asleep on
his shoulder. Kostya takes apart the TV and takes
the magnet out. He meets with Tatyana. Then, he
places the magnet on the camera which will create
an error. The guard sees that there's something
wrong and comes down to check the camera, but
when he doesn't find anything he leaves and they
can freely pass in front of it. Kostya and Tatyana
go to the freezer room where he sees the bodies.
There are scans of his body there also. She
asks him if he can feel the creature inside.
He says that he is the creature and that he can
remember everything in detail of what it has seen.
Kostya tells her that if Semiradov knew he would
never let him go. His co-pilot is there too,
but he's alive. He begs Tatyana to help him,
by enduring two more weeks in the Institute,
until a review board from Moscow arrives and he
can be set free. She asks him how he could endure
the creature killing people for two more weeks.
But, he asks her what she would've done in his
stead. Kill herself? Tatyana answers yes. Kostya
doesn't want to be guilty for feeding the creature
people or to die there after all that he's
been through. He wants to live and get his son.
Meanwhile in the orphanage, the child goes to
get a package and the nurse finds it again.
It scratches her and she calls it an invalid.
Back at the Institute, Tatyana is returning to her
room as two soldiers corner her and take her to
the offices of the Colonel. They argue about the
morals of the situation with the creature, with
him firmly believing that he's doing the right
thing in the name of peace. Tatyana doesn't think
that human sacrifice is needed, but the Colonel
tells her what kind of prisoners the men are. He
suggests they go to the feeding together so that
she could see it up close. At the feeding ground,
two prisoners are brought inside the cage and the
creature is let in. It keeps getting closer to the
men and Tatyana begs the Colonel to stop, saying
she'll find another way to feed it. Then she
asks to be let inside the cage with the creature.
She starts singing the same song she heard Kostya
sing before and the creature calms. Rigel and the
Colonel watch her do it, as the doctor exclaims
that the creature has adapted, that it can hear
now. While Tatyana is singing to the creature,
Kostya is seen reacting in his room as well, not
unconscious anymore. One of the prisoners undoes
his restraints and the creature hears him move.
It attacks him and kills him. After the feeding,
the Colonel asks Tatyana if Kostya can control the
creature. She tells him that he can't do it yet.
With her help, Semiradov thinks, that eventually
they will learn how to control the creature.
He asks her to put their differences aside.
The next day, Tatyana is working in the
room with the co-pilot, when Rigel comes in.
She starts talking to him in Latin, telling him
to help her and Kostya escape. He doesn't want to,
but she tells him to man up. Later, Rigel brings
her the sedatives she needed, but asks her not
to tell anyone he helped her. She walks over
to the guard and sedates him. Tatyana asks the
doctor to help one more time. He comes with her
to get Kostya. When she goes inside his room,
she finds him on the floor. She tells him
that the Colonel will do anything to keep
the creature there. Moreover, she's figured
out a way to get the creature out of him,
by injecting him with a combination of
drugs that will mimic a specific disease.
He doesn't want to do it, afraid that the creature
has adapted and that it will survive out of him.
Furthermore, he thinks the creature has
saved his life and tells her to run,
because it chose him for a reason. It was his
punishment for abandoning his son. She tells him
his son's name and age, so he changes his mind and
goes with her. The doctor tells them that there's
a car outside and gives her the keys. Tatyana asks
him to come with them, but he's decided to stay.
The two of them leave and Rigel goes to
the Colonel's office to make a call to
the authorities and give them information about
the Institute. Simultaneously, another soldier
finds the sedated guard. They check the footage
and see that Tatyana and Kostya are running.
The Colonel orders a response team to be sent,
to bring back Kostya alive and terminate Tatyana.
The response team finds and stops them. Back at
the office, Rigel is still on the phone, when
someone tries to come inside. He ends the call
the moment the Colonel gets inside the office.
The Colonel kills him. Meanwhile, Tatyana
and Kostya are hiding from the soldiers,
when he asks for the syringe with the drugs. She
throws it at him and he shoots the drugs in his
heart. The creature leaves his body and faces off
with the soldiers. They shoot at the creature,
but it starts killing them. Tatyana drags
Kostya to a car and they escape the compound.
Eventually, the Colonel goes to face the creature.
He drops a smoke bomb and starts shooting at it.
They're both hurt, but the Colonel shoots at
it again. At the same time, Kostya coughs up
blood in the car. Tatyana realizes that he won't
survive without the creature. He says that they
can still escape, but she drags him out of the
car. The Colonel reaches them and asks her if
she changed her mind. She says that they have
become fully symbiotic and can't be separated,
as the soldiers take the creature out of the
trunk. The Colonel drops the gun she was holding
and the soldiers open the creature's enclosure.
The Colonel incapacitates her, but Kostya manages
to control the creature and it kills the soldiers.
He goes after the Colonel next and kills him too.
Tatyana goes to check if Kostya is still alive
as the creature crawls to them. It doesn't kill
her and gets back into Kostya's body. She tells
him that she can separate them if she can get him
to Moscow. Suddenly, Kostya kills himself, as the
authorities Rigel called for arrive at the scene.
Tatyana is going to Rostov, where
the orphanage with Kostya's son is.
In a flashback, the kid comes back for the
package. The nurse finally acknowledges its
persistence and gives it the package. It
opens it to find sneakers inside. Tatyana
walks inside the orphanage and tells the guard at
reception that she's there to adopt Kostya's son.
Meanwhile, the child is putting on the sneakers
and stands up from its wheelchair. The nurse says
that everything will be alright and the child
turns and tells her that its name is Tatyana.
In the present, she's waiting outside for the boy.
He comes out and she greets him. They embrace.